========
 Change
========


::
   
   I'm still asking you to believe - not in my ability to bring about
   change, but in yours. I believe in change because I believe in you.

   Barack Obama

The world is in a period of rapid change.

It has been for some time, the last 250 years started with the
industrial revoloution.

In 1950 the computer age began to mushroom.

By 1980 there were Cray XMP supercomputers, consuming 1000's of watts
and weighing 1000's of kilograms.

Now you can go for a run with $35 raspberry pi, with more compute
power than the Cray.

And gigabytes of storage.

And it is quick and easy to write simple software to do magical
things.

In the 1990's the internet emerged.  People everywhere finding and
creating a deluge of data.

Literature too, linux, gcc, python, perl, tex and latex.

The rapid change that began with the industrial revolution is
accelerating.

The information age is still in its infancy, but the younger have
known nothing else.

Climate
-------

Good information about the impacts of climate is becoming more widely
available.  People are seeing change for themselves and starting to
look for better information.

This information is only slowly being introduced to the models the
world is using.

There are lots of reasons for this, and some significant costs.

One cost is that pricing for insurance is being driven by a market
that is not adequately modelling the change that is taking place.

In some cases the hazards are modelled very well, but the uncertainty
in the frequency of events is likely very much under estimated.

Environmental
-------------

Climate change is just one issue.  There is also uncertainty in global
politics and the regulatory landscape.  Perhaps the biggest factor in
catastrophe modelling, over the 5-25 year time frame is what changes
there are in human activity.

There is a significant shift to renewable energy, as yet no signs of
it even starting to break the warming.  However, there are sceanarios
where there is a dramatic shift away from carbon.

Insurance and reinsurance contracts are predominantly 1-year
contracts.  Businesses tend to focus on the short term: one year,
often just next quarter.

In the SEC, there are discussions about companies having to disclose
their assessments of climate risk to their business.  This may help
them focus on longer term issues.

Cities are taking the lead in many areas, one US has (or is) creating
an online site where home owners could assess their flood risk.

Others are looking at longer term models and trying to plan
strategcially to manage the change they face.   Flooding, and in
particular coastal towns create severe challenges.  How do we change
development to a more sustainable future?   How can models help?

There are also some significant collaborations between cities across
the globe.  Coordination is challenging, but something that the free
software world understands well.

The software tools available now allow very powerful systems to be
built in a matter of weeks or months.  Efforts are currently
fragmented.  It is so easy to do your own thing and have some good
results that opportunities to work with others on common problems are
often missed.

There is a lot we can do now to make significant progress on modelling
the changes facing the world.  We need systems that allow people in
different organisations to compare their models, share the work on
enhancing the models and have informed discussions about the
differences.

Social
------

There is dramatic social change occurring in many parts of the world,

People are anxious about robots, algorithms and AI.

I just read Garry Kasparov's Deep Thinking.   It goes back over his
history of playing chess against computers.  In particular, his battle
with IBM and Deep Blue.

Garry is optimistic about the future with computers.  He sees how
humans working with wonderful calculating machines opens up many
unimagined opportunities.

Working with computers has been a struggle, constant change.  Some
innovation.

Python has been a good friend.  The community focussing on the common
problems people face and helping build bridges.

Bridges
-------

New ideas emerge and if the stand the test of a little time, python
evolves to embrace those ideas.

async and await in python 3 open up many new possibilities.  Or
rather, allow others to adapt older solutions to the new paradigm.

Much of IT is about connecting two things, building a bridge between
the two worlds.

There are bridges everywhere.  Low level, between two very specific
systems, higher level interfaces for querying.  Ways to display data.

Ways to collect data.

The free software communities allow you to look around, see where
things are heading, find others thinking about the same problems.

And find stronger bridges, bridges that connect more pieces.

Time
----

Tracking how models perform and evolve over time is invaluable.




